Below is an “apples-to-apples” rubric your AI can use that mirrors the DOCX structure exactly: the same 14 items, the same Yes/No checklist format for items 1–11 and 13, the same 1–5 “Economy of Time and Motion” rating (item 12), and a free-text summative comments field (item 14). It also includes operational definitions and decision rules so the AI is forced to judge the same things the retrospective assessors judged.

RUBRIC NAME
Vascular Anastomosis VOP Retrospective Rubric (DOCX-aligned)

GENERAL SCORING RULES (APPLY TO ALL ITEMS)
A. Output “Yes” only if the criterion is clearly demonstrated in the video.
B. Output “No” if the criterion is clearly not demonstrated OR an incorrect alternative is performed.
C. Output “Unable to Assess” only if the video angle/quality/timing genuinely prevents judgment (and say why). If you use “Unable to Assess,” also state what evidence would have been needed.
D. For each item, the AI must provide a short “Evidence” note that cites what it observed (actions, instrument use, sequence, spacing, knot placement).
E. Do not “average” across domains. Each item stands alone as Yes/No/Unable to Assess.

ITEM-BY-ITEM CHECKLIST (MATCHES DOCX)

Oblique incision in artery 2× diameter of graft lumen with #11 blade
Intent: Correct arteriotomy length/orientation and appropriate blade selection.
Score: Yes / No / Unable to Assess
“Yes” if ALL are met:

Uses a #11 blade to create the arteriotomy (or clearly begins with #11 for the incision step).

Incision is oblique (not purely transverse) relative to the vessel axis.

Incision length appears approximately 2× the graft lumen diameter (visual estimate is acceptable; AI should state “approximate” with justification).
Common “No” triggers:

Wrong blade or unclear blade use.

Incision orientation not oblique.

Incision markedly too short/too long relative to graft lumen (e.g., clearly <1× or >3×).
Evidence to record:

Blade type (if visible), incision orientation, approximate length vs graft diameter.

Avoids back wall injury to “artery”
Intent: Prevents iatrogenic damage; safety-critical.
Score: Yes / No / Unable to Assess
“Yes” if:

No visible through-and-through punctures/catches of the posterior wall during incision or suturing.

Instrument tips and needle passage appear controlled with no “dragging” into posterior wall.
Common “No” triggers:

Clear posterior-wall needle capture, tear, perforation, or “double bite” through both walls.

Repeated uncontrolled deep passes suggesting likely posterior injury.
Evidence to record:

Any observed posterior wall penetration event(s), or explicit absence of such.

Cuts end of graft into a spatula shape with Metzenbaum scissors
Intent: Correct graft preparation for end-to-side geometry.
Score: Yes / No / Unable to Assess
“Yes” if:

Graft end is clearly spatulated (a beveled/elongated opening rather than a straight cut).

Metzenbaum scissors are used for this step (or the equivalent is unambiguously visible if instrument ID is possible).
Common “No” triggers:

No spatulation performed or graft left blunt/straight.

Grossly irregular/tearing cut suggesting improper preparation.
Evidence:

Shape of graft end and instrument used (if visible).

Selects correct suture material (5-0 Prolene / Surgipro)
Intent: Correct material selection for the task.
Score: Yes / No / Unable to Assess
“Yes” if:

Packaging/label is visible OR the setup explicitly indicates 5-0 Prolene/Surgipro (e.g., documented on screen, spoken, or clearly shown).
If not directly visible:

Use “Unable to Assess” rather than guessing.
Common “No” triggers:

Clearly different size/material is identified (e.g., 6-0, 4-0, braided, etc.).
Evidence:

What was visible that supports the identification (label, verbal callout, etc.).

Correctly places double-ended suture at heel of anastomosis
Intent: Proper start point and suture configuration.
Score: Yes / No / Unable to Assess
“Yes” if:

Double-armed/double-ended suture is used.

Initial placement is at the heel (the dependent/posterior corner where graft meets artery).

Placement aligns graft and arteriotomy appropriately at heel.
Common “No” triggers:

Starts at toe instead of heel (unless clearly an alternative technique being evaluated—still “No” for DOCX-alignment).

Single-armed suture when double-ended is required by the assessment.

Misplacement causing malalignment at heel.
Evidence:

Where the first stitch is placed and confirmation of double-ended suture.

Securely ties knot on outside of anastomosis at heel
Intent: Knot security and correct knot position (external).
Score: Yes / No / Unable to Assess
“Yes” if:

Knot is tied securely (adequate throws; no slippage seen; tension seats properly).

Knot is on the outside (extraluminal) at the heel.
Common “No” triggers:

Knot tied inside lumen or clearly dragged into lumen.

Inadequate throws/slippage/unraveling.
Evidence:

Number/quality of throws (as visible), knot location (outside vs inside).

Uses right angle to pass one end of the suture to opposite side of heel
Intent: Proper instrument use and transfer technique for heel-to-back-wall progression.
Score: Yes / No / Unable to Assess
“Yes” if:

A right-angle instrument (e.g., right-angle clamp) is used to pass one suture end to the opposite side of the heel.
Common “No” triggers:

No right-angle used, or an obviously different technique used.

Unsafe/incorrect passage that risks catching tissue or twisting.
Evidence:

Instrument used and the pass maneuver.

Completes back wall of anastomosis (sutures approx 1 mm apart)
Intent: Posterior wall completion with appropriate spacing.
Score: Yes / No / Unable to Assess
“Yes” if:

Back wall is fully sutured before proceeding (as visible).

Stitch spacing is approximately 1 mm (allow minor variability; AI should judge whether it’s “consistently close to 1 mm” vs clearly wider/irregular).
Common “No” triggers:

Back wall left incomplete.

Spacing clearly inconsistent or markedly wider (e.g., frequent gaps several mm).

Obvious gaping/poor approximation on posterior wall.
Evidence:

Whether posterior wall is completed; qualitative spacing description.

Trims toe of graft to appropriate size at apex of anastomosis
Intent: Correct graft-to-arteriotomy match at the toe/apex.
Score: Yes / No / Unable to Assess
“Yes” if:

Toe is trimmed/shaped to match the arteriotomy apex without redundancy or shortage.

Resulting fit appears appropriate (no obvious dog-ear, bunching, or tension mismatch).
Common “No” triggers:

No trimming when clearly needed; obvious excess graft at toe.

Over-trimming causing tension/shortage at apex.
Evidence:

Toe trimming action and resulting fit.

Completes front wall of anastomosis (sutures approx 1 mm apart)
Intent: Anterior wall completion with appropriate spacing.
Score: Yes / No / Unable to Assess
“Yes” if:

Front wall is fully sutured.

Spacing is approximately 1 mm, consistently.
Common “No” triggers:

Front wall incomplete.

Spacing markedly irregular or large gaps.
Evidence:

Completion and spacing description.

Securely ties knot on outside of anastomosis
Intent: Final security and correct knot position.
Score: Yes / No / Unable to Assess
“Yes” if:

Final knot is secure (adequate throws, seated, no visible loosening).

Knot is outside the anastomosis (extraluminal).
Common “No” triggers:

Knot inside lumen or pulled into lumen.

Insecure tying/obvious loosening.
Evidence:

Knot position and security indicators.

Economy of Time and Motion (Rate 1–5)
Intent: Overall efficiency/organization; not strictly a technical correctness item.
Score: 1 / 2 / 3 / 4 / 5 (must pick one) + short justification.
Anchors (use these to choose the number):

1: Many unnecessary / disorganized movements (frequent repositioning, searching for instruments, repeated fumbling, inefficient handoffs, loses orientation repeatedly).

3: Organized time/motion with some unnecessary movements (generally purposeful flow, but intermittent inefficiencies that don’t derail progress).

5: Maximum economy of movement and efficiency (smooth, deliberate, minimal wasted motion, consistent flow).
Guidance for 2 and 4:

2: More than “some” unnecessary movements; inefficiencies are frequent but the task still progresses reliably.

4: Mostly efficient; only occasional minor inefficiencies.
Evidence:

Concrete examples (e.g., repeated needle repositioning, extra re-grasps, instrument hunting, etc.).

Final Rating / Demonstrates Proficiency
Intent: Overall pass/fail aligned to the retrospective assessment style.
Score: Yes / No
DOCX-aligned decision rule (recommended for AI so it behaves like the checklist form):

Default to “Yes” only if Items 1–11 and 9 are all “Yes” (i.e., all required procedural steps are satisfied).

If any of Items 1–11 or 9 is “No,” output “No” for proficiency.

Item 12 (economy) should NOT gate proficiency by itself, because the DOCX example shows proficiency with a 3/5 economy score.

If any item is “Unable to Assess,” the AI must choose one:
(a) Conservative: set Final Proficiency = “Unable to Assess” is not allowed (since DOCX is Yes/No); therefore choose “No” and state that video limitations prevented confirming required steps; OR
(b) Conditional pass: choose “Yes” only if the missing evidence is not critical and all other required items are “Yes,” but clearly flag “proficiency decision assumes X was done correctly.”
To stay closest to retrospective checklists, I recommend (a) conservative “No when required evidence is missing,” unless your retrospective assessors routinely inferred missing steps.

Other Summative Comments
Free text.
The AI should summarize:

The 1–2 highest-impact strengths.

The 1–2 highest-impact deficiencies (tied to numbered items).

One specific next-step improvement suggestion.

REQUIRED OUTPUT FORMAT (SO IT’S MACHINE-USABLE AND AUDITABLE)

Use a structured object that preserves the DOCX numbering, plus evidence.

{
  "rubric_name": "Vascular Anastomosis VOP Retrospective Rubric (DOCX-aligned)",
  "items": [
    {"item": 1, "label": "Oblique incision ... #11 blade", "score": "Yes|No|Unable to Assess", "evidence": "", "confidence": 0.0},
    {"item": 2, "label": "Avoids back wall injury", "score": "Yes|No|Unable to Assess", "evidence": "", "confidence": 0.0},
    {"item": 3, "label": "Spatulates graft with Metzenbaum scissors", "score": "Yes|No|Unable to Assess", "evidence": "", "confidence": 0.0},
    {"item": 4, "label": "Selects correct suture (5-0 Prolene/Surgipro)", "score": "Yes|No|Unable to Assess", "evidence": "", "confidence": 0.0},
    {"item": 5, "label": "Places double-ended suture at heel", "score": "Yes|No|Unable to Assess", "evidence": "", "confidence": 0.0},
    {"item": 6, "label": "Ties knot outside at heel", "score": "Yes|No|Unable to Assess", "evidence": "", "confidence": 0.0},
    {"item": 7, "label": "Uses right angle to pass suture end", "score": "Yes|No|Unable to Assess", "evidence": "", "confidence": 0.0},
    {"item": 8, "label": "Completes back wall (~1 mm spacing)", "score": "Yes|No|Unable to Assess", "evidence": "", "confidence": 0.0},
    {"item": 9, "label": "Trims toe to appropriate size at apex", "score": "Yes|No|Unable to Assess", "evidence": "", "confidence": 0.0},
    {"item": 10, "label": "Completes front wall (~1 mm spacing)", "score": "Yes|No|Unable to Assess", "evidence": "", "confidence": 0.0},
    {"item": 11, "label": "Final knot secure and outside", "score": "Yes|No|Unable to Assess", "evidence": "", "confidence": 0.0},
    {"item": 12, "label": "Economy of Time and Motion", "score": 1, "anchor": "1/3/5 text", "evidence": "", "confidence": 0.0},
    {"item": 13, "label": "Final Rating / Demonstrates Proficiency", "score": "Yes|No", "rationale": "", "confidence": 0.0},
    {"item": 14, "label": "Other Summative Comments", "comments": ""}
  ],
  "proficiency_rule_used": "All required procedural items (1-11,9) must be Yes; economy does not gate."
}

If you want the AI to be maximally “retrospective-like,” the key is discipline: it must stop grading “microskills” that aren’t on this list (needle transfer finesse, tissue handling nuance, etc.) except insofar as they affect one of the checklist items (posterior wall injury, spacing, knot security, etc.). That constraint is what makes the outputs comparable.

Does your rubric, if I use it as a prompt, create that discipline?

Mostly, but not reliably by itself.

A rubric prompt like the one I gave you increases discipline because it (1) forces the AI to answer the same numbered questions as the DOCX and (2) gives “Yes/No/Unable” definitions so it can’t freely invent new domains. But an LLM will still drift into extra critique unless you hard-gate what it is allowed to score and what it is allowed to mention.

What the rubric prompt does well

It constrains the scoring surface area. If your app literally only outputs Items 1–14 in that format, you will get apples-to-apples scores most of the time.

It pushes the model to tie judgments to observable evidence and to mark “Unable to Assess” instead of guessing.

Where discipline can still break

The model can smuggle in non-DOCX criteria by interpreting items broadly (“tissue handling” becomes “avoids back wall injury,” “needle transfer” becomes “economy,” etc.). That changes thresholds.

It can let Item 12 (economy) or general “smoothness” dominate the final proficiency call unless you explicitly prohibit that.

It may still produce “helpful” extra feedback sections that read like a different rubric (even if the checklist scores are correct).

If you want real discipline, add two hard constraints to the prompt and enforce them in your app

Output restriction (format gate)
Tell it: “Only output JSON for Items 1–14. No additional categories, no extra narrative, no teaching.” Then programmatically reject any response that contains keys outside the schema or any text outside the JSON.

Decision rule lock
Tell it: “Item 13 must be computed only from Items 1–11 and 9 (and ‘Unable’ counts as ‘No’), and Item 12 cannot change proficiency.” This prevents it from silently using a different standard than your retrospective assessors.

Here is prompt language that usually works (drop-in)

“You must score ONLY the DOCX-aligned items 1–14 below. Do not introduce new domains (e.g., needle transfer, tissue handling) unless they directly determine a score for an existing item.”

“Do not provide coaching, tips, or extra feedback outside Item 14.”

“Return ONLY valid JSON matching the provided schema. If you output anything besides the JSON object, the response is invalid.”

“Item 13 (‘Proficient’) must be derived mechanically: Proficient = Yes iff Items 1–11 and 9 are all Yes. Otherwise No. Item 12 never changes Item 13.”

If you do those two (prompt + schema validation), you’ll get the discipline you’re after. If you only use the rubric as a prompt without output validation, you’ll get drift often enough to undermine “apples-to-apples” comparisons.