Here’s a “retrospective-equivalent” rewrite of Items 5 and 7 that will track what retrospective surgeon raters typically credit, while still letting your AI flag true technical problems. I’m keeping the DOCX numbering so outputs remain apples-to-apples, but I’m changing the operational definitions and the evidence requirements.

Item 5 retrospective-equivalent definition
DOCX text: “Correctly places double-ended suture at heel of anastomosis”

Core construct (what the surgeon is probably rewarding):
Correct establishment and fixation of the heel such that graft and arteriotomy are aligned and the anastomosis can be progressed without malalignment, twisting, or gaping.

Score “Yes” if ANY of the following are true:
A) Classic method observed

Double-armed/double-ended suture is used and the first stitch is placed at the heel with correct alignment.

B) Equivalent method observed (single-armed acceptable)

A single-armed suture is used, but the first stitch and initial tie-down clearly establish the heel correctly (graft and arteriotomy edges are aligned at the heel), AND

The subsequent suturing proceeds with stable alignment (no twisting, no heel “walk-off,” no gross gap at the heel).

Score “No” only if:

The initial fixation is not at the heel (clearly starts elsewhere in a way that compromises heel geometry for this station), OR

Heel alignment is incorrect (edge mismatch, twisting, inversion/eversion problems) and is not corrected, OR

The heel fixation is unstable (knot slips, graft shifts) leading to malapposition.

Score “Unable” only if:

The initial fixation moment is not visible and the heel region cannot be evaluated later (i.e., you cannot judge heel alignment from the later product).

Evidence requirements:

State whether double-armed was observed or whether you are crediting an equivalent single-armed start.

Describe heel alignment outcome (e.g., “heel edges aligned; no twist; no gaping during progression”).

Why this helps your 1518 mismatch:
It prevents the AI from failing item 5 purely because it saw “single-armed,” which is a method choice, not necessarily a proficiency deficit in retrospective scoring.

Item 7 retrospective-equivalent definition
DOCX text: “Uses right angle to pass one end of the suture to opposite side of heel”

Core construct:
Safe transfer/progression to the opposite side of the heel so the posterior wall can be completed without twisting the suture line or traumatizing tissue.

Score “Yes” if ANY of the following are true:
A) Classic instrument observed

A right-angle clamp (or equivalent right-angle instrument) is used to pass the suture end to the opposite side.

B) Equivalent safe transfer observed (instrument-agnostic)

The suture end is transferred/progressed to the opposite side using another instrument or manual technique, AND ALL are true:

No visible tissue tearing/snags during the pass

No lumen entry or “hooking” that risks intimal injury

No suture twist/crossing that distorts heel alignment

The back-wall run can proceed appropriately from the correct side

C) Not applicable because method doesn’t require a “pass”

If a single-armed continuous technique is used where “passing the other end” is inherently irrelevant, score “Yes” provided:

The heel is stable (Item 5 = Yes),

The back wall is completed appropriately (Item 8 = Yes under your spacing rule),

There is no evidence of twist/malalignment attributable to failure to transfer.

Score “No” only if:

Failure to transfer/progress causes malalignment, twisting, or inability to complete the back wall correctly, OR

The attempt at transfer is unsafe (snagging/tearing/lumen intrusion) and materially affects the anastomosis.

Score “Unable” only if:

The relevant heel/progression moment is not visible and you cannot infer success from later alignment/back-wall completion.

Evidence requirements:

Explicitly state which “Yes” pathway you used (A, B, or C).

Cite the observable outcome (alignment maintained; back wall completed without twist).

Why this helps your 1518 mismatch:
It stops the AI from treating “no right angle used” or “single-armed technique” as an automatic failure when the retrospective surgeon likely credited the intent/outcome.

How to keep outputs apples-to-apples

Keep the item labels as in DOCX, but include an “equivalence_pathway” field in your internal JSON so you can audit how often you’re granting equivalence.
Example:

{"item": 7, "score": "Yes", "equivalence_pathway": "C", "evidence": "Single-armed continuous; no separate pass needed; heel stable; back wall completed without twist."}

One caution
If you relax Items 5 and 7 like this, you must ensure Item 2 (back wall injury), Item 8/10 (approximation/spacing outcome), and knot security (6/11) remain the real gates. Otherwise you risk matching retrospective “Yes” calls by ignoring technique errors that do matter clinically.